Editorial review of the whole document (#296)
ietf-rats-wg/architecture: draft-ietf-rats-architecture.md

# Reference Use Cases {#referenceusecases}

> This section covers a number of representative generic use cases for remote attestation, independent of specific

Author: ```suggestion
This section covers a number of representative and generic use cases for remote attestation, independent of specific
```

solutions.  The purpose is to provide motivation for various aspects of the
architecture presented in this document.  Many other use cases exist, and this
document does not intend to have a complete list, only to illustrate a set of use
cases that collectively cover all the functionality required in the architecture.

> Each use case includes an description followed by an additional summary of the

Author: ```suggestion
Each use case includes a description followed by an additional summary of the
```

provide trustworthy device identity and protected storage for measurements.
The system components perform a series of measurements that may be
signed via functions provided by a root of trust, considered as Evidence about present system components, such as hardware,
firmware, BIOS, software, etc.

Attester:

: A device desiring access to a network.

Relying Party:

: Network equipment such as a router, switch, or access point,
responsible for admission of the device into the network.

## Confidential Machine Learning Model Protection

A device manufacturer wants to protect its intellectual property.
The intellectual property's scope primarily encompasses the machine learning (ML) model that is deployed in the devices purchased by its customers.
The protection goals include preventing attackers, potentially
the customer themselves, from seeing the details of the model.

This typically works by having some protected environment
in the device go through a remote attestation with some manufacturer service
that can assess its trustworthiness.  If remote attestation succeeds,
then the manufacturer service releases either the model, or a key to decrypt

> a model already deployed on the  Attester in encrypted form, to the requester.

Author: ```suggestion
a model already deployed on the Attester in encrypted form, to the requester.
```

Attester:

: A device desiring to run an ML model.

Relying Party:

: A server or service holding ML models it desires to protect.

## Confidential Data Protection

This is a generalization of the ML model use case above, where
the data can be any highly confidential data, such as health data
about customers, payroll data about employees, future business plans, etc.

> As part of the Remote Attestation Procedures, an assessment is made against a set

Reviewer: Should this change be reverted, per Laurence's proposed rule?

of policies to evaluate the state of the system that is requesting
the confidential data.  Attestation is desired to prevent leaking data via 
compromised devices.

Attester:

: An entity desiring to retrieve confidential data.

Relying Party:

: An entity that holds confidential data for release to authorized entities.

## Critical Infrastructure Control

Potentially harmful physical equipment
(e.g., power grid, traffic control, hazardous chemical processing, etc.)
is connected to a network in support of critical infrastructure.  The organization managing such infrastructure
needs to ensure that only authorized code and users can control corresponding critical
processes, and that these processes are protected from unauthorized manipulation or other threats.
When a protocol operation can affect a critical system component of the 
infrastructure, devices attached to that critical component require some assurances depending on the security context, including that: a requesting device or application has not been compromised, and the requesters and actors act on applicable policies.

> As such, RATS can be used to only accept commands from requesters

Reviewer: Should RATS be changed back to "remote attestation"?

that are within policy.

Attester:

: A device or application wishing to control physical equipment.

Relying Party:

: A device or application connected to potentially dangerous physical
equipment (hazardous chemical processing, traffic control, power grid,
etc.).

## Trusted Execution Environment Provisioning

A Trusted Application Manager (TAM) server is responsible
for managing the applications running in a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) of a client device.
To achieve its purpose, the TAM needs to assess the state of a TEE, or of applications

> in the TEE, of a client device.  The TEE conducts Remote Attestation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the TEE, of a client device.  The TEE conducts a Remote Attestation
```
grammar

> in the TEE, of a client device.  The TEE conducts Remote Attestation
> Procedure with the TAM, which can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the TEE, of a client device.  The TEE conducts Remote Attestation
Procedures with the TAM, which can
```

then decide whether the TEE is already in compliance with the TAM's latest

> policy. Alternatively, the TAM has to uninstall, update, or install approved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
policy. If not, the TAM has to uninstall, update, or install approved
```

In the Fast IDentity Online (FIDO) protocol {{WebAuthN}}, {{CTAP}}, the device in the user's hand authenticates the human user, whether by biometrics (such as fingerprints), or by PIN and password.
FIDO authentication puts a large amount of trust in the device compared to typical password authentication because it is the device that verifies the biometric, PIN and password inputs from the user, not the server.
For the Relying Party to know that the authentication is trustworthy, the Relying Party needs to know that the Authenticator part of the device is trustworthy.

> The FIDO protocol employs Remote Attestation Procedures for this.

Reviewer: I think Laurence's point was this should be reverted since FIDO doesn't use RATS WG output?

The FIDO protocol supports several remote attestation protocols and a mechanism by which new ones can be registered and added. Remote attestation defined by RATS is thus a candidate for use in the FIDO protocol.

> Other biometric authentication protocols such as the Chinese IFAA standard and WeChat Pay as well as Google Pay make use of remote attestation in one form or another.

Reviewer: What's the rule your following for "remote attestation" like here vs "Remote Attestation Procedures" like in 333?

> Other biometric authentication protocols such as the Chinese IFAA standard and WeChat Pay as well as Google Pay make use of remote attestation in one form or another.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other biometric authentication protocols such as the Chinese IFAA standard and WeChat Pay as well as Google Pay make use of Remote Attestation Proceedures in one form or another.
```

Reviewer 3: To me, "Remote Attestation Procedures" refers to standards and documents by this group. Since FIDO and WeChat and such don't use RATS (yet) this should be just "remote attestation"

Reviewer: Laurence's distinction sounds fine to me.  That might affect other places in the doc too that this PR is touching so we should look at each occurrence.

~~~~
{:dataflow #dataflow title="Conceptual Data Flow"}

The text below summarizes the activities conducted by the roles illustrated in {{dataflow}}.

An Attester creates Evidence that is conveyed to a Verifier.

An Verifier uses the Evidence, any Reference Values from Reference Value Providers, and any Endorsements from Endorsers,
by applying an Appraisal Policy for Evidence to assess the trustworthiness of the Attester. This activity is called the appraisal of Evidence.

Consecutively, the Verifier generates Attestation Results for use by Relying Parties.  Appraisal Policies for Evidence
might be obtained from an Endorser along with the Endorsements, and/or might be obtained
via some other mechanism, such as being configured in the Verifier by the Verifier Owner.

A Relying Party uses Attestation Results by applying its own
appraisal policies to make application-specific decisions, such as authorization decisions.

> Appraisal Policies for Attestation Results are configured in the Relying Party by the Relying Party Owner,

Reviewer: Here and in line 364 and 378 I think "Policy" singular is more appropriate than "Policies" plural which sound like alternative policies.   Whereas "Policy" is flexible in size (like "water" in English).

> appraisal policies to make application-specific decisions, such as authorization decisions.
> Appraisal Policies for Attestation Results are configured in the Relying Party by the Relying Party Owner,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
appraisal policy to make application-specific decisions, such as authorization decisions.
The Appraisal Policy for Attestation Results is configured in the Relying Party by the Relying Party Owner,
```

and/or are programmed into the Relying Party.

> This activity is called the appraisal of Attestation Results.

Reviewer: 362 and 372 say "activity" but you used the term "Remote Attestation Procedures" rather than "Remote Attestation Activities".  And similarly in 387 it's "appraisal procedure".   Should "activity" be "procedure"?  If not, what's the difference?

Author: That is a disruption of the typical style. Next comment is a suggested fix

## Appraisal Policies

The Verifier, when appraising Evidence, or the Relying Party, when
appraising Attestation Results, checks the values of some Claims

> against constraints specified in their appraisal policies. Examples of such constraints checking include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
against constraints specified in its appraisal policy. 
Examples of such constraints checking include:
```

~~~~
{:dataflow #dataflow title="Conceptual Data Flow"}

The text below summarizes the activities conducted by the roles illustrated in {{dataflow}}.

An Attester creates Evidence that is conveyed to a Verifier.

A Verifier uses the Evidence, any Reference Values from Reference Value Providers, and any Endorsements from Endorsers,

> by applying an Appraisal Policy for Evidence to assess the trustworthiness of the Attester. This activity is called the appraisal of Evidence.

Author: ```suggestion
by applying an Appraisal Policy for Evidence to assess the trustworthiness of the Attester. This procedure is called the appraisal of Evidence.
```

Among all the Attesters, there may be only some which have the ability to communicate
with the Verifier while others do not.

For example, a carrier-grade router consists of a chassis and multiple slots.
The trustworthiness of the router depends on all its slots' trustworthiness.
Each slot has an Attesting Environment, such as a TEE, collecting the
Claims of its boot process, after which it generates Evidence from the Claims.
Among these slots, only a main slot can communicate with the Verifier
while other slots cannot. But other slots can communicate with the main
slot by the links between them inside the router. So the main slot collects
the Evidence of other slots, produces the final Evidence of the whole router and
conveys the final Evidence to the Verifier. Therefore the router is a composite
device, each slot is an Attester, and the main slot is the lead Attester.

Another example is a multi-chassis router composed of multiple single carrier-grade routers.
Multi-chassis router setups create redundancy groups that provide higher throughput by interconnecting
multiple routers in these groups, which can be treated as one logical router for simpler management.

> A multi-chassis router setup provides a management point that connects to the Verifier and typically designated a main router in the group.

Reviewer: Can't parse grammar in the last phrase above... what's the verb?

> A multi-chassis router setup provides a management point that connects to the Verifier and typically designated a main router in the group.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A multi-chassis router setup provides a management point that connects to the Verifier and typically has already designated a main router in the group.
```

Other routers in the multi-chassis setup are connected to the main router only via physical network links
and are therefore managed and appraised via the main router's help.

> In consequence, a multi-chassis router setup is the composite device,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In consequence, a multi-chassis router setup is a composite device,
```

> each router is an Attester and the main router is the lead Attester.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
each router is an Attester, and the main router is the lead Attester.
```

ROLIE {{RFC8322}},
802.1x, OPC UA {{OPCUA}}, etc.), depending on the use case.

Typically, such protocols already have mechanisms for passing security information for authentication and authorization purposes.
Common formats include JWTs {{RFC7519}}, CWTs {{RFC8392}}, and X.509 certificates.

Retrofitting already deployed protocols with remote attestation requires
adding RATS conceptual messages to the existing data flows. This must be
done in a way that does not degrade the security properties of the systems involved
and should use native extension mechanisms provided by the underlying
protocol. For example, if a TLS handshake is to be extended with
remote attestation capabilities, attestation Evidence may be embedded
in an ad-hoc X.509 certificate extension (e.g., {{TCG-DICE}}), or into a new
TLS Certificate Type (e.g., {{?I-D.tschofenig-tls-cwt}}).

Especially for constrained nodes there is a desire to minimize
the amount of parsing code needed in a Relying Party, in order to both
minimize footprint and to minimize the attack surface. While
it would be possible to embed a CWT inside a JWT, or a JWT inside an
X.509 extension, etc., there is a desire to encode the information

> natively in formats that are already supported by the Relying Party.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
natively in a format that is already supported by the Relying Party.
```
Relying Party is singular, and it might only support one format, so avoid implying multiple.

# Freshness {#freshness}

> A Verifier or Relying Party need to learn the point in time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Verifier or Relying Party might need to learn the point in time
```

(i.e., the "epoch") an Evidence or Attestation Result has been produced.  This
is essential in deciding whether the included Claims and their values can be
considered fresh, meaning they still reflect the latest state of the Attester,
and that any Attestation Result was generated using the latest Appraisal Policy
for Evidence.

> There is, however, always a

Reviewer: Why were the above lines removed?

considered fresh, meaning they still reflect the latest state of the Attester,
and that any Attestation Result was generated using the latest Appraisal Policy
for Evidence.

> Freshness is assessed based on the Appraisal Policy for Evidence or Attestation Results
> that compares the estimated epoch against an "expiry" threshold defined locally to that policy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Freshness is assessed based on the Appraisal Policy for Evidence or Attestation Results
that compares the estimated epoch against an "expiry" threshold defined locally to that policy.
```

and that any Attestation Result was generated using the latest Appraisal Policy
for Evidence.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Freshness is assessed based on the Appraisal Policy for Evidence or Attestation Results
that compares the estimated epoch against an "expiry" threshold defined locally to that policy.
```

The first approach is to rely on synchronized and trustworthy clocks, and
include a signed timestamp (see {{?I-D.birkholz-rats-tuda}}) along with the
Claims in the Evidence or Attestation Result.  Timestamps can also be added on a
per-Claim basis to distinguish the time of generation of Evidence or Attestation
Result from the time that a specific Claim was generated.  The clock's

> trustworthiness can be established via Endorsements and typically requires additional Claims about the signer's time

Reviewer: Above is probably true, but not necessarily so I'd prefer weakening slightly to perhaps
```suggestion
trustworthiness can generally be established via Endorsements and typically requires additional Claims about the signer's time
```
(rationale: there are odd corner cases not worth mentioning... e.g., where the attesting environment has no clock but does have a secure channel to a peripheral that does - like a GPS receiver, and so it always has to ask the peripheral, so might be more like a composite device or something where the Endorsement of the Attesting Environment itself doesn't help, it's the Endorsement of the other hardware component that does.  Point being vagueness about details is good here.)

The conveyance of Evidence and the resulting Attestation Results
reveal a great deal of information about the internal state of a
device as well as potentially any users of the device.
In many cases, the whole point of attestation procedures is
to provide reliable information about the type of the device and the
firmware/software that the device is running.
This information might be particularly interesting to many attackers.
For example, knowing that a device is
running a weak version of firmware provides a way to aim attacks better.

> Many Claims in attestation Evidence and Attestation Results are potentially

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many Claims in Evidence and Attestation Results are potentially
```

Personally Identifying Information (PII) depending on the end-to-end use case of
the remote attestation procedure.

> Remote attestation that goes up to include containers and applications, e.g., in a multi-tenant architecture, may further

Reviewer: The "multi-tenant architecture" example isn't wrong, but is different than the original case in mind.
The original case was that if you identify specific apps (e.g., a blood pressure monitor, etc.) the app id can be PII.

> Remote attestation that goes up to include containers and applications, e.g., in a multi-tenant architecture, may further

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remote attestation that goes up to include containers and applications, e.g., a blood pressure monitor, may further
```

reveal details about specific systems or users.

> In some cases, an attacker may be able to make inferences about the contents of attestation Evidence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, an attacker may be able to make inferences about the contents of Evidence
```

from the resulting effects or timing of the processing.
For example, an attacker might be able to infer the value of specific Claims if it knew that only certain values were accepted by the Relying Party.

> Evidence and Attestation Results are expected to be integrity protected (i.e. either via signing or a secure channel) and optionally might be confidentiality protected via encryption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Evidence and Attestation Results are expected to be integrity protected (i.e., either via signing or a secure channel) and optionally might be confidentiality protected via encryption.
```

Another approach to deal with Evidence is to remove PII from the Evidence
while still being able to verify that the Attester is one of a large set.
This approach is often called "Direct Anonymous Attestation".  See

> {{CCC-DeepDive}} section 6.2 for more discussion and .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{CCC-DeepDive}} section 6.2 for more discussion.
```

> {{CCC-DeepDive}} section 6.2 for more discussion and .

Reviewer 2: The goal was to reference the DAA paper here too.

# Security Considerations {#security-considerations}

## Attester and Attestation Key Protection

Implementers need to pay close attention to the protection of the Attester and the manufacturing processes for provisioning attestation key material. If either of these are compromised, intended levels of assurance for RATS are compromised because attackers can forge Evidence or manipulate the Attesting Environment.
For example, a Target Environment should not be able to tamper with the
Attesting Environment that measures it, by isolating the two environments
from each other in some way.

> Remote attestation applies to use cases with a range of security requirements, so the protections discussed here range from low to high security where low security may be limited to application or process isolation by the device's operating system and high security may involve specialized hardware to defend against physical attacks on a chip.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remote attestation applies to use cases with a range of security requirements, so the protections discussed here range from low to high security where low security may be limited to application or process isolation by the device's operating system, and high security may involve specialized hardware to defend against physical attacks on a chip.
```

### On-Device Attester and Key Protection

It is assumed that an Attesting Environment is sufficiently isolated from the
Target Environment it collects Claims about and that it signs the resulting Claims set with an attestation
key, so that the Target Environment cannot forge Evidence about itself.  Such
an isolated environment might be provided by a process, a dedicated chip,
a TEE, a virtual machine, or another secure mode of operation.

> The Attesting Environment must be protected from unauthorized modification to ensure it behaves correctly. Confidentiality protection of the Attesting Environment is vital to protect the signing key in a way so it cannot be misused to forge Evidence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Attesting Environment must be protected from unauthorized modification to ensure it behaves correctly. Confidentiality protection of the Attesting Environment's signing key is vital so it cannot be misused to forge Evidence.
```

In many cases the user or owner of a device that takes on the role of Attester must not be able to modify or extract keys from its Attesting Environments.

> For example, the owner or user of a mobile phone or FIDO authenticator, having full control over the keys, might not be trusted to use the keys to report Evidence about the environment that protects the keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the owner or user of a mobile phone or FIDO authenticator might not be trusted to use the keys to report Evidence about the environment that protects the keys.
```

An essential value-add provided by RATS is for the Relying Party to be able to trust the Attester even if the user or owner is not trusted.

> Measures for a minimally protected system might include process or application isolation provided by a high-level operating system, and restricted access to root or system privileges. In contrast, For really simple single-use devices that don’t use a protected mode operating system, like a Bluetooth speaker, the only factual isolation might be the sturdy housing of the device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Measures for a minimally protected system might include process or application isolation provided by a high-level operating system, and restricted access to root or system privileges. In contrast, For really simple single-use devices that don't use a protected mode operating system, like a Bluetooth speaker, the only factual isolation might be the sturdy housing of the device.
```

Measures for a moderately protected system could include a special restricted operating environment, such as a TEE. In this case, only security-oriented software has access to the Attester and key material.

Measures for a highly protected system could include specialized hardware that is used to provide protection against chip decapping attacks, power supply and clock glitching, faulting injection and RF and power side channel attacks.

### Attestation Key Provisioning Processes

> Attestation key provisioning is the process that occurs in the factory or elsewhere in order to establishes signing key material on the device and the validation key material off the device. Sometimes this is procedure is referred to as personalization or customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attestation key provisioning is the process that occurs in the factory or elsewhere to establish signing key material on the device and the validation key material off the device. Sometimes this is procedure is referred to as personalization or customization.
```

One way to provision key material is to first generate it external to the device and then copy the key onto the device.

> In this case, confidentiality protection of the generator, as well as for the path over which the key is provisioned by, is necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, confidentiality protection of the generator, as well as for the path over which the key is provisioned, is necessary.
```

The manufacturer needs to take care to protect corresponding key material with measures appropriate for its value.

Confidentiality protection can be realized via physical provisioning facility security involving no encryption at all. For low-security use cases, this might be simply locking doors and limiting personnel that can enter the facility. For high-security use cases, this might involve a special area of the facility accessible only to select security-trained personnel.

Typically, cryptography is used to enable confidentiality protection. This can result in recursive problems, as the key material used to provision attestation keys must again somehow have been provisioned securely beforehand (requiring an additional level of protection, and so on).

In general, a combination of some physical security measures and some cryptographic measures is used to establish confidentiality protection.

> Another way to provision key material is to generate it on the device and export the validation key. If public-key cryptography is being used, then only integrity is necessary. Confidentiality is not necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way to provision key material is to generate it on the device and export the validation key. If public-key cryptography is being used, then only integrity is necessary. Confidentiality of public keys is not necessary.
```

Typically, cryptography is used to enable confidentiality protection. This can result in recursive problems, as the key material used to provision attestation keys must again somehow have been provisioned securely beforehand (requiring an additional level of protection, and so on).

In many cases both some physical security and some cryptography will be necessary and useful to establish confidentiality.
In general, a combination of some physical security measures and some cryptographic measures is used to establish confidentiality protection.

Another way to provision the key material is to generate it on the device and export the verification key. If public key cryptography is being used, then only integrity is necessary. Confidentiality is not necessary.
Another way to provision key material is to generate it on the device and export the validation key. If public-key cryptography is being used, then only integrity is necessary. Confidentiality is not necessary.

In all cases, the Attestation Key provisioning process must ensure that only attestation key material that is generated by a valid Endorser is established in Attesters and then configured correctly.

> For many use cases, this will involve physical security at the facility, to prevent unauthorized devices from being manufactured that may be counterfeit or incorrectly configured.

Reviewer: Why was this sentence removed?   I don't think the point about counterfeit devices appears elsewhere does it?

It is also important that the appraisal policy was itself obtained securely.
If an attacker can configure appraisal policies for a Relying Party or for a Verifier, then integrity of the process is compromised.

> Security protected conveyed information in RATS may be applied at different layers, whether by a conveyance protocol, or an information encoding format. This architecture expects conceptual messages (see {{messages}}) to be end-to-end protected based on the role interaction context.

Author: protecting vs. protected. As Giri just quoted this exact snippet and seemed to have no problems with it at all. Maybe I simply did not get the original meaning? Nevertheless, as it confuses me, maybe it also confuses other non-native speakers?

Reviewer: I can parse the original (red) start of this paragraph but I cannot parse the green change.

> Security protected conveyed information in RATS may be applied at different layers, whether by a conveyance protocol, or an information encoding format. This architecture expects conceptual messages (see {{messages}}) to be end-to-end protected based on the role interaction context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Information conveyed in RATS may be applied at different layers, whether by a conveyance protocol, or an information encoding format. This architecture expects conceptual messages (see {{messages}}) to be end-to-end protected based on the role interaction context.
```

| RX | Result expiry               | An Attestation Result should no longer be accepted, according to the Verifier that generated it.

Using the table above, a number of hypothetical examples of how a solution might be built are illustrated below.
This list is not intended to be complete,
but is just representative enough to highlight various timing considerations.

All times are relative to the local clocks, indicated by an "_a" (Attester),

> "_v" (Verifier), or "r" (Relying Party) suffix.

Author: ```suggestion
"_v" (Verifier), or "_r" (Relying Party) suffix.
```
